keeping it all the way real does not
mean telling the truth at all times all
right you know if you attend your
grandfather's funeral that might not be
the best time to let everyone in the
crowd know that he was a worthless
alcoholic and a gambler there is a kind
of limited and spare and tactical use of
truth in our daily lives with loved ones
and certainly even in politics okay if
you've been watching this YouTube
channel for six years you will remember
at some point I used the example of
saying hey you know what if you know
women who lie to you about their body
weight if you don't women who lie to you
about their diet and you know we're
gonna lie to you about your age you know
I'm inclined to just let them keep on
lying to me you know I really don't feel
that the value of truth in my life is
interrupting someone and saying no
you're not 135 pounds no you're more
like hundred six five I don't do that
you might think my personal commitment
to honesty and keeping it real means
that I I don't I don't actually all
right there are some types of
half-truths and self-deceptions
that are dangerous and there are
sometimes and the people who know you we
surround you in life or lying to
themselves and like do you lie to others
well you have to ask yourself do I love
this person enough do I care about them
enough to be honest even if it's really
gonna hurt them even if it's really
gonna upset them and as I say that's not
gonna be about something like hey you've
been saying that you're 29 for three
years and it's not gonna be about oh you
say you're 135 pounds and you know you
gain 20 pounds since last night it's not
it's not gonna be about something that
that's yellow
okay I I check on Hannah mania every so
often you know and it really struck me
today that there's a very slip
a very dangerous kind of self-deception
that goes on even in describing yourself
as having a mental illness you know and
if you're gonna address this with
somebody like I say it's got to be out
of a certain kind of love it's got to be
out of a certain kind of compassion it's
got a bit of a certain kind of
engagement you know what I had a cold
that lasted 28 days a couple months ago
now it's possible it was the corona
virus I don't know and it changed me
while I had that cold there was a
pathogen in my body there was a virus in
my body possibly also bacteria in my
body there was something that changed my
personality and changed my behavior and
changed my voice and made it difficult
for me to sleep at night and difficult
to get out of bed in the morning and
difficult to do grocery shopping made it
difficult to breathe I actually ran out
of breath when recording YouTube videos
during the twenty eight days and for a
couple weeks afterwards I said I don't
know that was coronavirus just a really
serious cold all right there is
absolutely no sense in which you have
mental illness in the same sense that
you have a cold and the reason why this
is such a dangerous deception is that
the notion of having it as an illness
brings with it the assumption that
you're gonna have a recovery there's a
different person that you were before
you had the illness and others this
brief interruption of you having the
illness and then afterwards gonna be
your real self again right just like
when I got over my cold I can breathe
through my nose again right and my voice
returns to normal and right when when
it's hard for you to get out of bed in
the morning because you have
quote-unquote mental illness right it's
hard for you to get out of bed in the
morning because of who you are because
of the life you're living
and and how you feel about it right I'm
not saying this from a place of being
disparaging or dismissive or hateful I
know what it's like to be suicidal for
years for several years in a row and
let's go past
let's go past this slightly vague notion
of Quantico being suicidal I know what
it's like to live a life where I wake up
in the morning and think I would rather
be dead than to keep on living this life
notice already there's a real difference
in phrasing it that way right this is
partly about Who I am
how I feel and it's partly about the
life I'm leading and then of course how
that makes me feel right you can even
see this new apartment in the background
here okay for some people the life I'm
leading right now would be paradise
right and then some people have
ambitions that would make this life that
I'm leading stultifying cloister ring
confining dissatisfactory miserable
there are some people who might even be
driven to the edge of suicide but living
the life I'm leading right now and let's
go back to the other side of the world
when I was leading a totally different
life doing humanitarian work and
historical research and political
research and studying languages and had
no electricity in the jungles of
northwestern Laos have to add a footnote
here that there was really no jungle
left or everyday I saw the jungle being
cut down blah blah blah but whatever you
know living for someone else that would
be misery and for me being motivated
about what I was motivated by right in a
lot of ways it was wonderful
I could even just pause it's all about
me it's not just the life I'm living
it's not just the circumstances right
like I could be in that village worried
about getting malaria but I chose to be
there I was there for a reason I had my
motivations in my ambitions and there's
some other guy living in that village
and he wishes he could be in this
apartment in Canada taking a shower in
the shower and having this electrical
light that plugs in and I'm not joking I
was in villages with these really basic
things didn't exist and they still had
bomb craters from the war and well
military bases it's not worth describing
to leftovers the war on the poverty and
and what have you
and they were living under a communist
regime right you know I mean I think
probably the thing that made me most
unhappy when I was out there I wasn't
unhappy about you know you have to boil
the water before you drink it because
all the water has shall we say pathogens
and it has parasites you know wasn't
chopping my own firewood I was I was
eating absolutely nothing but yellow
lentils were white rice and a vitamin
pill when I could get garlic I had a
garlic when I couldn't get garlic
nothing else none of that made me
unhappy you know what maybe I'm happy
being disrespected by my boss having my
trust betray but having conflict with my
twittle maybe you know look I think for
a lot of people that's what life's like
you can have a fabulous apartment in
downtown Manhattan Paris Berlin doesn't
matter and you have a conflict with your
boss and you're unhappy too and I was
sleeping in a bamboo hut with no
electricity but living life I wanted to
live terms of research and all these
other things and why am i unhappy cuz I
got conflict so I just say this is a
kind of great human human enclosure and
and I've known people I knew one woman
in / - I remember she she had really
been suicidal for years because of a
relationship with her boss and we
weren't we weren't friends for a long
time we were friends fo two weeks or
something and I remember she described
to me when she finally sat down with her
boss and told her that she was quitting
he had no idea he had absolutely no idea
of the impact he'd had in her life for I
think was about five years you've been
working
same job and that same she had no idea
was making her life miserable you know I
do you know I you know uh alright so
these are the palpable and impalpable
ways in which all of us suffer and our
suffering takes place in the shadow of
our ambitions it takes place you know on
a canvas the frame for which we choose
ourselves limits we figure out and
impose from our own imaginations of the
life we could be living you know and you
can be haunted by that whether you're in
Manhattan or Paris or Berlin or in the
jungle right that there's some other
life you could be living or should be
living this link better you could do my
grandfather on my mother's side he owned
a small factory that took a marble and
cut it into lighters interesting guy as
soon as he learned cigarettes cause
cancer completely shut down he genuinely
didn't know cigarettes are bad for your
health and we learned they worried
completely got out of that kind of
business but he made you know ok money
with a small workshop of guys who would
take take stone and polish it and cut it
and make a make a lighter you know very
fancy high-end lighter miserable his
whole life because he want to be a
lawyer and he could have been he knew he
was smart enough he knew he couldn't
been and I think about once a week or
something he'd just be sitting there he
ate the same thing for dinner every
night unusual guy mismatching he'd be
sitting there with his wife he just
wouldn't be talking to be miserable and
she'd say to him do it today put in your
application to go to law school don't
regret it you'd hold for another day too
and you know again his terms of his a
member of the house he lived in you know
he lived in a nice enough house he had a
good you've seen it to start my
girlfriend self-camera you saw though
that was he lived in it was a the front
of it at least
it holds nothing nothing wrong was like
he was miserable he was miserable every
day that's life because he felt he
wasted his intellectual potential he was
you know and hate come on only so many
ways you can cut a slab of marble into a
bunch of letters and then I guess
maybe you have the irony of learning you
were just helping people kill themselves
with cancer - filthy terrible have it me
I don't know I don't know how much that
matter did I just don't know all right
[Music]
the concept of mental illness is
dangerous it's a form of self-deception
you know far far worse than telling
yourself you weigh 135 pounds when you
weigh 165 or telling yourself you're
still 29 years old when you're 32 or
whatever the case may be all right
because what you're telling yourself is
that your sickness is something other
than who you are and that arose from
some kind of pathogen that has nothing
to do with you and your values and your
ambitions and doesn't have to do with
your circumstances and the life you're
leading and how you feel about it and it
doesn't have to do with the decisions
you're gonna make we're gonna change it
all right and illness absolute by
definition right what there were two
possibilities here right either like the
corona virus however long it lasts 14
days or 28 days either this too will
pass or you you too will pass but even
if the corona virus kills you right
it is something other than you you at
least have the comfort of knowing this
virus is not me
it's not who I really am and what you're
calling mental illness is you it's who
you really are and the cure is whatever
you are willing to do about it